**CHEMISTRY-BCHC-51:GROUP –B (theory)**

**ORGANIC CHEMISTRY**

**Organic Spectroscopy: 25 Lectures**

*NMR Spectroscopy:* Basic principles of Proton Magnetic Resonance,
chemical shift and factors influencing it; Spin – Spin coupling and
coupling constant; Anisotropic effects in alkene, alkyne, aldehydes and
aromatics, Interpretation of NMR spectra of simple compounds.

**Learning Outcome:**

-  define and explain the relevant terms and models used in basic NMR
   theory

-  analyze NMR pulse sequences using this basic NMR theory

-  execute basic 1-dimentional proton and carbon experiments on a
   standard NMR spectrometer

-  interpret 1-dimentional NMR spectra from simple organic compounds

-  How are integration values, spin coupling and coupling constant in H1
   NMR useful

**CHEMISTRY-BCHC-42:**

**ORGANIC CHEMISTRY-IV**

**Heterocyclic Compounds: 15 Lectures **

Classification and nomenclature, Structure, aromaticity in 5-numbered
and 6-membered rings containing one heteroatom; Synthesis, reactions and
mechanism of substitution reactions of: Furan, Pyrrole (Paal-Knorr
synthesis, Knorr pyrrole synthesis, Hantzsch synthesis), Thiophene,
Pyridine (Hantzsch synthesis), Pyrimidine, Structure elucidation of
indole, Fischer indole synthesis and Madelung synthesis), Structure
elucidation of quinoline and isoquinoline, Skraup synthesis,
Friedlander’s synthesis, Knorr quinoline synthesis, Doebner- Miller
synthesis, Bischler-Napieralski reaction, Pictet-Spengler reaction,
Pomeranz-Fritsch Reaction; Derivatives of furan: Furfural and furoic
acid.

**Learning Outcome:**

-  Heterocyclic compounds are very interesting due to their distinct
   structure and the availability of this kind of heterocyclic
   structures in medicinal drugs.

-  So the technique of synthesis of heterocyclic compounds is important
   in the synthesis of different drugs.

-  The course aims at giving a fundamental theoretical understanding of
   heterocyclic chemistry, including alternative general methods for
   ring synthesis and application of such methods for the preparation of
   specific groups of heterocyclic systems.

-  Moreover, it gives the quantitative ideas about the synthesis,
   properties and uses of such heterocyclic compounds like pyrole,
   pyridine qunolene, thiophene, furan etc.

-  The student will get familiar with particular properties and
   reactions for the most important heterocycles as well as different
   systems of nomenclature.

**Generic Elective Papers (GE) (Minor-Chemistry)**

**GECH-1**

***Section B: Organic Chemistry-1* (30 Periods)**

**Fundamentals of Organic Chemistry: XX Lectures**

Physical Effects, Electronic Displacements: Inductive Effect,
Electromeric Effect, Resonance

and Hyperconjugation. Cleavage of Bonds: Homolysis and Heterolysis.
Structure, shape and reactivity of organic molecules: Nucleophiles and
electrophiles. Reactive Intermediates: Carbocations, Carbanions and free
radicals. Strength of organic acids and bases: Comparative study with
emphasis on factors affecting pK values. Aromaticity: Benzenoids and
Hückel’s rule.

Stereochemistry: XX Lectures

Conformations with respect to ethane, butane and cyclohexane.
Interconversion of Wedge Formula, Newmann, Sawhorse and Fischer
representations. Concept of chirality (upto two carbon atoms).
Configuration: Geometrical and Optical isomerism; Enantiomerism,
Diastereomerism and Meso compounds). Threo and erythro; D and L; *cis* –
*trans* nomenclature; CIP Rules: R/ S (for upto 2 chiral carbon atoms)
and E / Z Nomenclature (for upto two C=C systems).

-  Predict relative energies and locations of frontier molecular
   orbitals for organic molecules of intermediate complexity using
   linear combinations of atomic orbitals and hybridized orbital
   approaches.

-  Use reaction kinetics, linear free energy relationships, isotope
   labeling, stereo-electronic effects and stereochemical outcomes to
   determine reaction mechanisms.

-  Predict reaction mechanisms of major classes of organic reactions,
   including substitutions, eliminations, additions and radical
   reactions.

-  Recognize the impact of non-covalent interactions in complex systems
   and reaction mechanisms.

-  Calculate optical purity and enantiomeric excess.

-  Draw all the stereoisomers of organic compounds, and recognise
   diastereomers, enantiomers, meso compounds and centres of symmetry.

-  Recognise and discuss the stereoisomers of chiral compounds that do
   not contain a stereogenic carbon centre and assign the configuration
   of the stereoisomers.

-  Explain and predict the stereochemical outcome of organic reactions
   by considering the reaction mechanism.

-  Perform the synthesis, separation and characterisation of organic
   compounds in the laboratory and report and discuss the results of
   experiments using the appropriate technical language.
