
===========
Semester-IV
===========

-----------------------------------------------
CHEMISTRY-BCHC-42 (ORGANIC CHEMISTRY-IV) CCCH9A
-----------------------------------------------

Theory (credit: 4, 60 lectures)

Dynamic Stereochemistry of acyclic and cyclic compounds: 14 Lecture
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Conformation, reactivity and mechanism of acyclic and cyclic systems,
Asymmetric synthesis and asymmetric induction, Acyclic stereoselection,
Addition of nucleophiles to carbonyl compounds: 1,2-asymmetric
induction, Cram's open chain, cyclic(chelate) and dipolar model, Prelogs
rule. The aldol reaction. Neighbouring group participation and molecular
rearrangements.

Conformation and reactivity of alicyclic compounds, effect of
substituent stereochemistry on reactivity of cyclohexane derivatives,
steric effect, stereoelectronic effects, reduction of cyclic ketones and
reaction of cyclic epoxides, neighbouring group effects, effect of
conformation on rearrangment and transannular reactions in alicyclic
system, lactonization reactions of cyclohexane systems, oxidation of
cyclohexanols with chromic acid, steric assistance and steric hindrence.
Diastereoselection in cyclic systems: Nucleophilic addition to cyclic
ketones, formation of axial and equatorial alcohols.

Heterocyclic Compounds: 12 Lectures
-----------------------------------

Classification and nomenclature, Structure, aromaticity in 5-numbered
and 6-membered rings containing one heteroatom; Synthesis, reactions and
mechanism of substitution reactions of:

Furan, Pyrrole (Paal-Knorr synthesis, Knorr pyrrole synthesis, Hantzsch
synthesis), Thiophene, Pyridine (Hantzsch synthesis), Pyrimidine,
Structure elucidation of indole, Fischer indole synthesis and Madelung
synthesis), Structure elucidation of quinoline and isoquinoline, Skraup
synthesis, Friedlander’s synthesis, Knorr quinoline synthesis, Doebner-
Miller synthesis, Bischler-Napieralski reaction, Pictet-Spengler
reaction, Pomeranz-Fritsch Reaction; Derivatives of furan: Furfural and
furoic acid.

Alkaloids &Terpenes: 6 Lectures
-------------------------------

Natural occurrence, General structural features, Isolation and their
physiological action Hoffmann’s exhaustive methylation, Emde’s
modification, Structure elucidation and synthesis of Hygrine and
Nicotine. Medicinal importance of Nicotine, Hygrine, Quinine, Morphine,
Cocaine, and Reserpine.

Occurrence, classification, isoprene rule; Elucidation of stucture and
synthesis of Citral, Neral and α-terpineol.

Carbohydrates: 12 Lectures
--------------------------

Occurrence, classification and their biological importance.

Monosaccharides: Constitution and absolute configuration of glucose and
fructose, epimers and anomers, mutarotation, determination of ring size
of glucose and fructose, Haworth projections and conformational
structures; Interconversions of aldoses and ketoses; Killiani- Fischer
synthesis and Ruff degradation;

Disaccharides – Structure elucidation of maltose, lactose and sucrose.

Polysaccharides – Elementary treatment of starch, cellulose and
glycogen.

Polynuclear Hydrocarbons: 8 Lectures
------------------------------------

Reactions of naphthalene phenanthrene and anthracene Structure,
Preparation and structure elucidation and important derivatives of
naphthalene and anthracene; Polynuclear hydrocarbons.

Amino Acids, Peptides and Proteins: 8 Lecture
---------------------------------------------

Amino acids, Peptides and their classification. α-Amino Acids -
Synthesis, ionic properties and reactions. Zwitterions, p\ *K*\ a
values, isoelectric point and electrophoresis;

Study of peptides: determination of their primary structures-end group
analysis, methods of peptide synthesis. Synthesis of peptides using
N-protecting, C-protecting and C-activating groups -Solid-phase
synthesis

-----------------------------------------------------------
COURSE: CCCH9B ; Organic Practical (credit: 2, 60 lectures)
-----------------------------------------------------------

Practical
---------

1. Organic preparations:

	- Acetylation of one of the following compounds: amines (aniline, *o*-,
	  *m*-, *p*\ toluidines and *o*-, *m*-, *p*-anisidine) and phenols
	  (β-naphthol, vanillin, salicylic acid) by any one method:

		a. Using conventional method.

		b. Using green approach

	- Benzolyation of one of the following amines (aniline, *o*-, *m*-,
	  *p*- toluidines and *o*-, *m*-, *p*-anisidine) and one of the following
	   phenols (β-naphthol, resorcinol, pcresol) by Schotten-Baumann reaction.

	- Oxidation of ethanol/ isopropanol (Iodoform reaction).

	- Bromination of any one of the following:

		a. Acetanilide by conventional methods

		b. Acetanilide using green approach (Bromate-bromide method)

	- Nitration of any one of the following:

		a. Acetanilide/nitrobenzene by conventional method

		b. Salicylic acid by green approach (using ceric ammonium nitrate).

	- Selective reduction of *meta* dinitrobenzene to *m*-nitroaniline.

	- Reduction of *p*-nitrobenzaldehyde by sodium borohydride.

	- Hydrolysis of amides and esters.

	- Semicarbazone of any one of the following compounds: acetone, ethyl
	  methyl ketone, cyclohexanone, benzaldehyde.

	- *S*-Benzylisothiouronium salt of one each of water soluble and water
	  insoluble acids (benzoic acid, oxalic acid, phenyl acetic acid 
	  and phthalic acid).

	- Aldol condensation using either conventional or green method.

	- Benzil-Benzilic acid rearrangement.

2. Extraction of caffeine from tea leaves.

------------------
Learning Objective
------------------

-  To learn the conformational and configurational effects on the
   reactivity of acyclic and cyclic compounds.

-  The course aims at giving a fundamental theoretical understanding of
   heterocyclic chemistry, including alternative general methods for
   ring synthesis and application of such methods for the preparation of
   specific groups of heterocyclic systems.

-  Moreover, it gives the quantitative ideas about the synthesis,
   properties and uses of such heterocyclic compounds like pyrole,
   pyridine qunolene, thiophene, furan etc.

-  The student will get familiar with particular properties and
   reactions for the most important heterocycles as well as different
   systems of nomenclature.

-  To make students familier with the structure, properties and 
   activities of several polynuclear hydrocarbon.

-  To gain knowledge on the chemistry of several primary and secondary
   metabolites.

----------------
Learning Outcome
----------------

By the end of this  course the students will be able to understand the 
effect of 3-D structure on the reactivity of a molecule. They can understand
the importance of heterocyclic moieties in chemistry. In addition they
understand the structure and function of several primary and secondary
metabolites obtained from plant and animals.

 
-----------------
Recommended Texts
-----------------

1. Clayden J., Greeves N., Warren S. & Wothers P. “Organic Chemistry”

2. Eliel, E. L., "Stereochemistry of Carbon Compounds"

3. J. March, "Advanced Organic Chemistry: Reactions, Mechanisms, and Structure"

4. Vogel's Textbook of Practical Organic Chemistry


