===========
Semester II
===========

-------------------------------------------------------------
COURSE CCCH4A: Organic Chemistry Group A (Theory, Credits:04)
-------------------------------------------------------------

Chemistry of Aliphatic Hydrocarbons: Lecture 20
-----------------------------------------------

A. Carbon-Carbon sigma bonds:Chemistry of alkanes: Formation of alkanes,
Wurtz Reaction, Wurtz-Fittig Reactions, Free radical substitutions: 
Halogenation -relative reactivity and selectivity.

B. Carbon-Carbon pi bonds: Formation of alkenes and alkynes by elimination 
reactions, Mechanism of E1, E2, E1cb reactions. Saytzeff and Hofmann 
eliminations.

*Reactions of alkenes:* Electrophilic additions their mechanisms
(Markownikoff/ Anti Markownikoff addition), mechanism of
oxymercuration-demercuration, hydroborationoxidation, ozonolysis,
reduction (catalytic and chemical), syn and anti-hydroxylation
(oxidation). 1,2-and 1,4-addition reactions in conjugated dienes and,
Diels-Alder reaction; Allylic and benzylic bromination and mechanism,
e.g. propene, 1-butene, toluene, ethyl benzene.

*Reactions of alkynes:* Acidity, Electrophilic and Nucleophilic
additions. Hydration to form carbonyl compounds, Alkylation of terminal 
alkynes.

Alkanes, Cycloalkanes and Conformational Analysis: 16 Lectures*
--------------------------------------------------------------

Nomenclature, types of strain, Bayer strain theory, measurement of
strain and classification of ring sizes, consequences of strain in
small, normal, medium and large ring, conformation behaviours of normal
rings, substituted cyclohexanes, effect of substitution on ring
conformation of cyclohexane, conformation of cyclohexene, effect of
strain on reactivity, ring synthesis - principles controlling ring
closure reactions, rules for ring closure (Baldwin's rule), ring
expansion and contraction processes, polycyclic system - Bredt's rule,
Conformational analysis of n-butane, dihaloethanes, glycols.

Aromatic Hydrocarbons: 12 Lectures
----------------------------------

*Aromaticity:* Hückel’s rule, aromatic character of arenes, cyclic
carbocations/carbanions and

heterocyclic compounds with suitable examples. Electrophilic aromatic
substitution: halogenation, nitration, sulphonation and Friedel-Craft’s
alkylation/acylation with their mechanism. Directing effects of the
groups.

Chemistry of Halogenated Hydrocarbons: 12 Lecture
-------------------------------------------------

*Alkyl halides:* Methods of preparation, nucleophilic substitution
reactions – S\ :sub:`N`\ 1, S\ :sub:`N`\ 2 and S\ :sub:`N`\ i mechanisms
with stereochemical aspects and effect of solvent etc.; nucleophilic
substitution vs. elimination.

*Aryl halides:* Preparation, including preparation from diazonium salts.
nucleophilic aromatic substitution; SNAr, Benzyne mechanism. Relative
reactivity of alkyl, allyl/benzyl, vinyl and aryl halides towards
nucleophilic substitution reactions.

------------------------------------------------------
COURSE: CCCH4B (Practical, Credits: -02) (60 Lectures)
------------------------------------------------------

1. Purification of organic compounds by crystallization using the
following solvents:

	- Water

	- Alcohol

	- Alcohol-Water

2. Determination of the melting points of above compounds and unknown
organic compounds (Kjeldahl method and electrically heated melting point
apparatus)

3. Qualitative analysis of solid organic compounds in respect of the
following: Detection of elements, determination of M.P., detection of
functional group and preparation of a derivative (with M.P):

4. Analysis of Carbohydrate: aldoses and ketoses, reducing and
non-reducing sugars.


