==========
Semester V
==========

-----------------------------------------------------------------
CHEMISTRY-BCHC-51:GROUP –B (theory-ORGANIC CHEMISTRY) (3 Credits)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Credit 2 + 1 (Tutorial) : Lecture 30 +15

Organic Spectroscopy: 20 Lectures
---------------------------------

General principles Introduction to absorption and emission spectroscopy.

*UV Spectroscopy:* Types of electronic transitions, λmax, Chromophores
and Auxochromes, Bathochromic and Hypsochromic shifts, Intensity of absorption;
Application of Woodward Rules for calculation of λmax for the following
systems: α,β unsaturated aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and
esters; Conjugated dienes: alicyclic, homoannular and heteroannular;
Extended conjugated systems (aldehydes, ketones and dienes); distinction
between cis and trans isomers.

*IR Spectroscopy:* Fundamental and non-fundamental molecular vibrations;
IR absorption positions of O, N and S containing functional groups;
Effect of H-bonding, conjugation, resonance and ring size on IR
absorptions; Fingerprint region and its significance; application in
functional group analysis.

*NMR Spectroscopy:* Basic principles of Proton Magnetic Resonance,
chemical shift and factors influencing it; Spin – Spin coupling and
coupling constant; Anisotropic effects in alkene, alkyne, aldehydes and
aromatics, Interpretation of NMR spectra of simple compounds.

Applications of IR, UV and NMR for identification of simple organic
molecules.

Elementary idea on mass spectrometry.


Dyes: 5 Lectures
----------------

Classification, Colour and constitution; Mordant and Vat Dyes; Chemistry
of dyeing; Synthesis and applications of: Azo dyes – Methyl Orange and
Congo Red (mechanism of Diazo Coupling); Triphenyl Methane Dyes
-Malachite Green, Rosaniline and Crystal Violet; Phthalein Dyes –
Phenolphthalein and Fluorescein; Natural dyes –structure elucidation and
synthesis of Alizarin and Indigotin; Edible Dyes with examples.


Polymers: 5 Lectures
--------------------

Introduction and classification including di-block, tri-block and
amphiphilic polymers; Number average molecular weight, Weight average
molecular weight, Degree of polymerization, Polydispersity Index.

Polymerisation reactions -Addition and condensation -Mechanism of
cationic, anionic and free radical addition polymerization;
Metallocene-based Ziegler-Natta polymerisation of alkenes; Preparation
and applications of plastics – thermosetting (phenol-formaldehyde,
Polyurethanes) and thermosoftening (PVC, polythene);

Fabrics – natural and synthetic (acrylic, polyamido, polyester); Rubbers
– natural and synthetic: Buna-S, Chloroprene and Neoprene;
Vulcanization; Polymer additives; Introduction to liquid crystal
polymers; Biodegradable and conducting polymers with examples.


-------------------
Learning objectives
-------------------

1. To make the students familiar with the basic principles of various
spectroscopic techniques (UV,IR, NMR, and MS).

#. How to analyze NMR pulse sequences using this basic NMR theory

#. How to execute basic 1-dimentional proton and carbon experiments on a
   standard NMR spectrometer

#. How to interpret 1-dimentional NMR spectra from simple organic compounds

#. How to apply these spectroscopic techniques in the structure
   elucidation of organic compounds.

#. How to analyze experimental NMR, IR, UV, and MS spectra

-----------------
Learning outcomes
-----------------

At the end of the course, the students will be able to gain knowledge of
how various spectroscopic techniques are used in Organic Chemistry.
Students will be well conversant with the applications of spectroscopic
techniques towards the determination of molecular structures. In
summary, they will learn about how to solve chemical and structural
problems in a systematic manner by applying these spectroscopic
techniques.


--------------------
Recommended Textbook
--------------------

1. Pavia, D.L., Lampman, G.M., and Kriz, G.S., "Introduction to
Spectroscopy"

2. Silverstein, R.M., and Webster, F.X., "Spectrometric Identification
of Organic Compounds"

3. Kemp, W. "Organic Spectroscopy"

4. Kalsi, P.S., "Spectroscopy of Organic Compounds"


