===========
Semester VI
===========

--------------------------------------------------------
GROUP –B (Theory) ORGANIC CHEMISTRY Credit 3: Lecture 45
--------------------------------------------------------

Pericyclic Reactions: Lecture 12
--------------------------------

Mechanism, stereochemistry, regioselectivity in case of

*Electrocyclic reactions:* FMO approach involving 4π- and 6π-electrons
(thermal and photochemical) and corresponding cycloreversion reactions.

*Cycloaddition reactions:* FMO approach, Diels-Alder reaction,
photochemical [2+2] cycloadditions.

*Sigmatropic reactions:* FMO approach, sigmatropic shifts and their
order; [1,3]- and [1,5]-H shifts and [3,3]-shifts with reference to
Claisen and Cope rearrangements.

Retrosynthetic analysis and functional group interconversion Lecture 12
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Basic concept on retrosynthesis, disconnection approach towards
synthesis of bifunctional molecules (both cyclic and acyclic), concept
of synthons, synthetic equivalents, functional group interconversion,
Protection and deprotection of common functional groups in synthetic
route, activation of synthetic equivalents, Disconnection and synthesis
of (1,3),(1,4) and (1,5)-dioxygenated compounds, Some specific examples
indicating the retrosynthetic approach to design a total synthesis.

Nucleic Acids, Enzymes and Lipids 12 Lectures
---------------------------------------------

Components of nucleic acids, Nucleosides and nucleotides;

Structure, synthesis and reactions of: Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine,
Uracil and Thymine;

Structure of polynucleotides.

Introduction, classification and characteristics of enzymes. Salient
features of active site of

enzymes. Mechanism of enzyme action (taking trypsin as example), factors
affecting enzyme action, coenzymes and cofactors and their role in
biological reactions, specificity of enzyme action (including
stereospecificity), enzyme inhibitors and their importance, phenomenon
of inhibition (competitive, uncompetitive and non-competitive inhibition
including allosteric inhibition). Introduction to oils and fats; common
fatty acids present in oils and fats, Hydrogenntion of fats and oils,
Saponification value, acid value, iodine number. Reversion and
rancidity.

Concept of Energy in Biosystems and Pharmaceutical Compounds 9 Lectures
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Cells obtain energy by the oxidation of foodstuff (organic molecules).

Introduction to metabolism (catabolism, anabolism).

ATP: The universal currency of cellular energy, ATP hydrolysis and free
energy change.

Agents for transfer of electrons in biological redox systems: NAD+, FAD.

Conversion of food to energy: Outline of catabolic pathways of
carbohydrate- glycolysis, fermentation, Krebs cycle.

Overview of catabolic pathways of fat and protein.

Interrelationship in the metabolic pathways of protein, fat and
carbohydrate.

Caloric value of food, standard caloric content of food types.

Classification, structure and therapeutic uses of antipyretics:
Paracetamol (with synthesis), Analgesics: Ibuprofen (with synthesis),
Antimalarials: Chloroquine (with synthesis). An elementary treatment of
Antibiotics and detailed study of chloramphenicol, Medicinal values of
curcumin (haldi), azadirachtin (neem), vitamin C and antacid
(ranitidine).


